29 July, 2020 is going to be an important day for Indian Education System, as the government decided to bring in National Education Policy (NEP) with a long term vision of making India a Global Knowledge Superpower with a focus on inclusiveness, participation and holistic approach. NEP 2020 is third in series since independence; the first two were introduced in 1968 and 1986 respectively. It is based on the pillars of Access, Equity, Quality, Affordability, and Accountability. This article will focus more on the vision plan made for Higher Education and potentials risks ahead. Risks can be managed well, only if identified correctly and at the right time. 

The new policy is expected to bring positive and long-lasting changes in the Indian higher education system. Several innovative ideas have been considered while formulating this policy to improve effectiveness and finally achieve its long term goal. There are some really great steps planned within the policy ambit for taking the Indian education system to a new level of excellence. Let’s see!!!

Enrolment ratio to be increased to 50% in the next 15 years, which is almost double the current percentage. The missing link here seems to be non-availability or shortage of basic infrastructure, trained faculty, research facility, gap between demand and supply, etc. The government needs to ensure that current facilities should be strengthened with some added resources to deliver effective education. Another step of multiple entry and exit option in undergraduate course with appropriate certification seems good initiative, but practically there are some operational glitches including acceptance of these partial certifications, degree or diploma in industry. Another detailed plan is required for those students who want to change subjects during their degree courses, larger questions finally relate to losing an academic year or dilution of degree value in the long run. 

A step is taken for making all the courses interdisciplinary, this can be a game-changer for making an overall education system more holistic and inclusive. This step in the long term requires trained multidisciplinary faculties too, for which the NEP remained silent. The policy provides a broad framework and is not mandatory to be followed. Education being a contemporaneous subject, gives flexibility to the state and centre to suggest and make policies. The set target and final outcomes are expected to be achieved by 2040, where clarity on fund arrangement and allocation is not talked about; making it risky for future. 

The policy mentioned about allowing foreign campuses to be opened in India. This is a commendable step, but the potential remains week due to high cost, insufficient resource allocation and relevance of various courses on offer. Some reports in 2013 stated that none out of top 20 universities have shown interest in opening up of campuses in India. In fact, most of the foreign universities want to work in India through local collaboration, currently, there are many undergraduates and postgraduate programs running in India with dual degree arrangement. This strategy helps in getting a better valued degree at much lesser price, but many remain sceptical about quality of academia offered.

Discontinuing M. Phil and focusing more on research can also reap larger long term benefits if the system is able to manage the current status of research students when the country is able to produce only half the requirement i.e. 50,000. Many research seats in tier 2 & 3 institutions remain vacant, due to various internal and external issues. M. Phil is a well-accepted course among employers and is seen as less rigorous than Doctorate, but far better than many PG courses; before discontinuation, the ecosystem needs some substitute, well accepted among employers and students. 

Establishing Academic Bank of Credit (ABC) is a good idea and will definitely bring ease for students and academic institutes. NEP also mentioned about phasing out of Affiliation of colleges in the next 15 years, this is expected to empower college and transform themselves into autonomous degree-granting college or constituent college of any university. Centralization of regulations, governance, grants, quality, and accreditation along with dedicated funds (6 to 7% of GDP, innovative technology-enabled, more flexible options to choose and the multidisciplinary idea is expected to bring sustainable changes in the long term. 

Every idea and policy is expected to bring positive systematic change in the system, this is not an exception, but we need to remember that most of these plans and policy fail due to operational and implementation issues.  